#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass memoir
\begin_preamble
\setcounter{chapter}{0}

\usepackage{fmtcount}
\usepackage{graphicx}

\renewcommand{\chaptermark}[1]{ \markboth{\textsc{#1}}{} }
\makepagestyle{myheadings}
  \makeevenhead{myheadings}{Chapter \thechapter\ ·\ \leftmark}{}{}
  \makeoddhead{myheadings}{}{}{}
  \makeevenfoot{myheadings}{\thepage}{}{}
  \makeoddfoot{myheadings}{}{}{\thepage}

\makechapterstyle{hpmor}{%
  \chapterstyle{default}
  \renewcommand*{\chapterheadstart}{}
  \renewcommand*{\chapnumfont}{\normalfont}
  \renewcommand*{\printchaptername}{%
     \chapnumfont \textsc{\chaptername\ \thechapter}}
  \renewcommand*{\chapternamenum}{}
  \renewcommand*{\printchapternum}{}
  \renewcommand*{\afterchapternum}{%
    \par\parbox{0.5in}{}\par}
  \renewcommand*{\printchapternonum}{%
    \vphantom{\chapnumfont \@chapapp 1}\par
    \parbox{0.5in}{}\par}
  \renewcommand*{\chaptitlefont}{\normalfont\LARGE\sffamily}
  \renewcommand*{\printchaptertitle}[1]{%
    \chaptitlefont\textsc{##1}}}
  \renewcommand*{\afterchaptertitle}{\par\vspace\par}
\chapterstyle{hpmor}

\usepackage{fmtcount}
\usepackage{changepage} %per cambiare la dimensione del paragrafo
\usepackage[usenames,dvipsnames]{xcolor} %per il titolo in rosso
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} %per alcuni problemi di hyphenation

\usepackage{fontspec,microtype}
\frenchspacing
%\widowpenalties 2 10000 0
%\clubpenalty 10000
%\raggedbottom
%\usepackage{indentfirst}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
initials
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman EB Garamond
\font_sans Linux Biolinum O
\font_typewriter Inconsolata
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts true
\font_sc false
\font_osf true
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format pdf4
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\paperwidth 6in
\paperheight 9in
\leftmargin 1.75cm
\topmargin 2.45cm
\rightmargin 7cm
\bottommargin 3.3cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle myheadings
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
The transformation of Rome from a Pagan into a Christian city
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
The relations between the Empire, the Christians, and the Jews have been
 discussed by really numberless writers, beginning with the Fathers of the
 Church.
 I have consulted, among the moderns: Mangold: 
\emph on
De ecclesia primaeva pro caesaribus et magistratibus romanis preces fundente
\emph default
.
 Bonn, 1881.
 — Bittner: 
\emph on
De Graecorum et Romanorum deque Judaeorum et christianorum sacris jejuniis
\emph default
.
 Posen, 1846.
 — Weiss: 
\emph on
Die römischen Kaiser in ihrem Verätnisse zu Juden und Christen
\emph default
.
 Wien, 1882.
 — Mourant Brock: 
\emph on
Rome, Pagan and Papal
\emph default
.
 London, Hodder & Co.
 1883.
 — Backhouse and Taylor: 
\emph on
History of the primitive Church
\emph default
.
 (Italian edition.) Rome, Loescher, 1890.
 — Greppo: 
\emph on
Trois mémoires relatifs à l'histoire ecclésiastique
\emph default
.
 — Döllinger: 
\emph on
Christenthum und Kirche
\emph default
.
 — Champagny (Comte de): 
\emph on
Les Antonins
\emph default
, vol.
 
\noun on
i
\noun default
.
 — Gaston Boissier: 
\emph on
La fin du paganisme
\emph default
, etc., 2 vols.
 Paris, Hachette, 1891.
 — Giovanni Marangoni: 
\emph on
Delle cose gentilesche trasportate ad uso delle chiese
\emph default
.
 Roma, Pagliarini, 1744.
 — Mosheim: 
\emph on
De rebus Christianis ante Constantinum
\emph default
.
 — Carlo Fea: 
\emph on
Dissertazione sulle rovine di Roma
\emph default
, in Winckelmann's 
\emph on
Storia delle arti
\emph default
.
 Roma, Pagliarini, 1783, vol.
 
\noun on
iii
\noun default
.
 — Louis Duchesne: 
\emph on
Le liber pontificalis
\emph default
.
 Paris, Thorin, 1886‑1892.
 — G.
 B.
 de Rossi: 
\emph on
Bullettino di archeologia cristiana
\emph default
.
 Roma, Salviucci, 1863‑1891.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Chapterprecis

\size small
The early adoption of Christianity not confined to the poorer classes.
 — Instances of Roman nobles who were Christians.
 — The family of the Acilii Glabriones.
 — Manius Acilius the consul.
 — Put to death because of his religion.
 — Description of his tomb, recently discovered.
 — Other Christian patricians.
 — How was it possible for men in public office to serve both Christ and
 Caesar? — The usual liberality of the emperors towards the new religion.
 — Nevertheless an open profession of faith hazardous and frequently avoided.
 — Marriages between Christians and pagans.
 — Apostasy resulting from these.
 — Curious discovery illustrating the attitude of Seneca's family towards
 Christianity.
 — Christians in the army.
 — The gradual nature of the transformation of Rome.
 — The significance of the inscription on the Arch of Constantine.
 — The readiness of the early Church to adopt pagan customs and even myths.
 — The curious mixture of pagan and Christian conceptions which grew out
 of this.
 — Churches became repositories for classical works of art, for which new
 interpretations were invented.
 — The desire of the early Christians to make their churches as beautiful
 as possible.
 — The substitution of Christian shrines for the old pagan altars at street
 corners.
 — Examples of both.
 — The bathing accommodations of the pagan temples adopted by the Church.
 — Also the custom of providing public standards of weights and measures.
 — These set up in the basilicas.
 — How their significance became perverted in the Dark Ages.
 — The adoption of funerary banquets and their degeneration.
 — The public store-houses of the emperors and those of the popes.
 — Pagan rose-festivals and their conversion into a Christian institution.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Initial
\begin_inset Argument
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
I
\end_layout

\end_inset

t has been contended,
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 and many still believe, that in ancient Rome the doctrines of Christ found
 no proselytes, except among the lower and poorer classes of citizens.
 That is certainly a noble picture which represents the new faith as searching
 among the haunts of poverty and slavery, seeking to inspire faith, hope,
 and charity in their occupants; to transform them from things into human
 beings; to make them believe in the happiness of a future life; to alleviate
 their present sufferings; to redeem their children from shame and servitude;
 to proclaim them equal to their masters.
 But the gospel found its way also to the mansions of the masters, nay,
 even to the palace of the Caesars.
 The discoveries lately made on this subject are startling, and constitute
 a new chapter in the history of imperial Rome.
 We have been used to consider early Christian history and primitive Christian
 art as matters of secondary importance, and hardly worthy the attention
 of the classical student.
 Thus, none of the four or five hundred volumes on the topography of ancient
 Rome speaks of the basilicas raised by Constantine; of the church of S.
 Maria Antiqua, built side by side with the Temple of Vesta, the two worships
 dwelling together as it were, for nearly a century; of the Christian burial-gro
unds; of the imperial mausoleum near S.
 Peter's; of the porticoes, several miles in length, which led from the
 centre of the city to the churches of S.
 Peter, S.
 Paul, and S.
 Lorenzo; of the palace of the Caesars transformed into the residence of
 the Popes.
 Why should these constructions of monumental and historical character be
 expelled from the list of classical buildings? and why should we overlook
 the fact that many great names in the annals of the empire are those of
 members of the Church, especially when the knowledge of their conversion
 enables us to explain events that had been, up to the latest discoveries,
 shrouded in mystery?
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is a remarkable fact that the record of some of these events should be
 found, not in church annals, calendars, or itineraries, but in passages
 in the writings of pagan annalists and historians.
 Thus, in ecclesiastical documents no mention is made of the conversion
 of the two Domitillae, or Flavius Clemens, or Petronilla, all of whom were
 relatives of the Flavian emperors; and of the Acilii Glabriones, the noblest
 among the noble, as Herodianus calls them (2.3).
 Their fortunes and death are described only by the Roman historians and
 biographers of the time of Domitian.
 It seems that when the official 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}feriale}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, or calendar, was resumed, after the end of the persecutions, preference
 was given to names of those confessors and martyrs whose deeds were still
 fresh in the memory of the living, and of necessity little attention was
 paid to those of the first and second centuries, whose acts either had
 not been written down, or had been lost during the persecutions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As the crypt of the Acilii Glabriones on the Via Salaria has become one
 of the chief places of attraction, since its re-discovery in 1888, I cannot
 begin this volume under better auspices than by giving an account of this
 important event.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See de Rossi: 
\emph on
Bullettino di archeologia cristiana
\emph default
, 1888--1889, p.
 15; 1890, p.
 97.
 — Edmond Le Blant: 
\emph on
Comptes rendus de l'Acad.
 des Inscript.
\emph default
, 1888, p.
 113.
 — Arthur Frothingham: 
\emph on
American Journal of Archaeology
\emph default
, June, 1888, p.
 214.
 — R.
 Lanciani: 
\emph on
Gli horti Aciliorum sul Pincio
\emph default
, in the 
\emph on
Bullettino della commissione archeologic
\emph default
a, 1891, p.
 132; 
\emph on
Underground Christian Rome
\emph default
, in the 
\emph on
Atlantic Monthly
\emph default
, July, 1891.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In exploring that portion of the Catacombs of Priscilla which lies under
 the Monte delle Gioie, near the entrance from the Via Salaria, de Rossi
 observed that the labyrinth of the galleries converged towards an original
 crypt, shaped like a Greek 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Dandelion}Γ}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 (Gamma), and decorated with frescoes.
 The desire of finding the name and the history of the first occupants of
 this noble tomb, whose memory seems to have been so dear to the faithful,
 led the explorers to carefully sift the earth which filled the place; and
 their pains were rewarded by the discovery of a fragment of a marble coffin,
 inscribed with the letters: 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon} 
\backslash
textsc{acilio glabrioni filio}}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Did this fragment really belong to the 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Dandelion}Γ}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 crypt, or had it been thrown there by mere chance? And in case of its belonging
 to the crypt, was it an isolated record, or did it belong to a group of
 graves of the Acilii Glabriones? The queries were fully answered by later
 discoveries; four inscriptions, naming Manius Acilius \SpecialChar \ldots{}
 and his wife Priscilla,
 Acilius Rufinus, Acilius Quintianus, and Claudius Acilius Valerius were
 found among the débris, so that there is no doubt as to the ownership of
 the crypt, and of the chapel which opens at the end of the longer arm of
 the 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Dandelion}Γ}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Manii Acilii Glabriones attained celebrity in the sixth century of Rome,
 when Acilius Glabrio, consul in 563 (
\noun on
b.c.

\noun default
 191), conquered the Macedonians at the battle of Thermopylae.
 We have in Rome two records of his career: the Temple of Piety, erected
 by him on the west side of the Forum Olitorium, now transformed into the
 church of S.
 Nicola in Carcere; and the pedestal of the equestrian statue, of gilt bronze,
 offered to him by his son, the first of its kind ever seen in Italy, which
 was discovered by Valadier in 1808, at the foot of the steps of the temple,
 and buried again.
 Towards the end of the republic we find them established on the Pincian
 Hill, where they had built a palace and laid out gardens which extended
 at least from the convent of the Trinità dei Monti to the Villa Borghese.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See Ersilia Lovatelli: 
\emph on
Il Monte Pincio
\emph default
, in the 
\emph on
Miscellanea archeologica
\emph default
, p.
 211.
 — Rodolfo Lanciani: 
\emph on
Su gli orti degli Acili sul Pincio
\emph default
, in the 
\emph on
Bullettino di corrispondenza archeologica
\emph default
, 1868, p.
 132.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 The family had grown so rapidly to honor, splendor, and wealth, that Pertinax,
 in the memorable sitting of the Senate in which he was elected emperor,
 proclaimed them the noblest race in the world.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Glabrio best known in the history of the first century is Manius Acilius,
 who was consul with Trajan, 
\noun on
a.d.

\noun default
 91.
 He was put to death by Domitian in the year 95, as related by Suetonius
 (
\emph on
Domit
\emph default
.
 10): 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

He caused several senators and ex-consuls to be executed on the charge of
 their conspiring against the empire, — 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}quasi molitores rerum novarum}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, — among them Civica Cerealis, governor of Asia, Salvidienus Orfitus, and
 Acilius Glabrio, who had previously been banished from Rome.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The expression 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}molitores rerum novarum}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 has a political meaning in the case of Cerealis and Orfitus, both staunch
 pagans, and a religious and political one in the case of Glabrio, a convert
 to the Christian faith, called 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}nova superstitio}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 by Suetonius and Tacitus.
 Other details of Glabrio's fate are given by Dion Cassius, Juvenal, and
 Fronto.
 We are told by these authors that during his consulship, 
\noun on
a.d.

\noun default
 91, and before his banishment, he was compelled by Domitian to fight against
 a lion and two bears in the amphitheatre adjoining the emperor's villa
 at Albanum.
 The event created such an impression in Rome, and its memory lasted so
 long that, half a century later, we find it given by Fronto as a subject
 for rhetorical composition to his pupil Marcus Aurelius.
 The amphitheatre is still in existence, and was excavated in 1887.
 Like the one at Tusculum, it is partly hollowed out of the rocky side of
 the mountain, partly built of stone and rubble work.
 It well deserves a visit from the student and the tourist, on account of
 its historical associations, and of the admirable view which its ruins
 command of the vine-clad slopes of Albano and Castel Savello, the wooded
 plains of Ardea and Lavinium, the coast of the Tyrrhenian, and the islands
 of Pontia and Pandataria.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Xiphilinus states that, in the year 95, some members of the imperial family
 were condemned by Domitian on the charge of atheism, together with other
 leading personages who had embraced 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the customs and persuasion of the Jews,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that is, the Christian faith.
 Manius Acilius Glabrio, the ex-consul, was implicated in the same trial,
 and condemned on the same indictment with the others.
 Among these the historian mentions Clemens and Domitilla, who were manifestly
 Christians.
 One particular of the case, related by Juvenal, confirms the account of
 Xiphilinus.
 He says that in order to mitigate the wrath of the emperor and avoid a
 catastrophe, Acilius Glabrio, after fighting the wild beasts at Albanum,
 assumed an air of stupidity.
 In this alleged stupidity it is easy to recognize the prejudice so common
 among the pagans, to whom the Christians' retirement from the joys of the
 world, their contempt of public honors, and their modest behavior appeared
 as 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}contemptissima inertia}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, most despicable laziness.
 This is the very phrase used by Suetonius in speaking of Flavius Clemens,
 who was murdered by Domitian 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}ex tenuissima suspicione}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, on a very slight suspicion of his faith.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Glabrio was put to death in his place of exile, the name of which is not
 known.
 His end helped, no doubt, the propagation of the gospel among his relatives
 and descendants, as well as among the servants and freedmen of the house,
 as shown by the noble sarcophagi and the humbler loculi found in such numbers
 in the crypt of the Catacombs of Priscilla.
 The small oratory at the southern end of the crypt seems to have been consecrat
ed exclusively to the memory of its first occupant, the ex-consul.
 The date and the circumstances connected with the translation of his relics
 from the place of banishment to Rome are not known.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Both the chapel and the crypt were found in a state of devastation hardly
 credible, as though the plunderers had taken pleasure in satisfying their
 vandalic instincts to the utmost.
 Each of the sarcophagi was broken into a hundred pieces; the mosaics of
 the walls and the ceiling had been wrenched from their sockets, cube by
 cube, the marble incrustations torn off, the altar dismantled, the bones
 dispersed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When did this wholesale destruction take place? In times much nearer ours
 than the reader may imagine.
 I have been able to ascertain the date, with the help of an anecdote related
 by Pietro Sante Bartoli in § 144 of his archaeological memoirs: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Excavations were made under Innocent 
\noun on
x
\noun default
 (1634--1655), and Clement 
\noun on
ix
\noun default
 (1667--1670), in the Monte delle Gioie, on the Via Salaria, with the hope
 of discovering a certain hidden treasure.
 The hope was frustrated; but, deep in the bowels of the mound, some crypts
 were found, encrusted with white stucco, and remarkable for their neatness
 and preservation.
 I have heard from trustworthy men that the place is haunted by spirits,
 as is proved by what happened to them not many months ago.
 While assembled on the Monte delle Gioie for a picnic, the conversation
 turned upon the ghosts who haunted the crypt below, when suddenly the carriage
 which had brought them there, pushed by invisible hands, began to roll
 down the slope of the hill, and was ultimately precipitated into the river
 Anio at its base.
 Several oxen had to be used to haul the vehicle out of the stream.
 This happened to Tabarrino, butcher at S.
 Eustachio, and to his brothers living in the Via Due Macelli, whose faces
 still bear marks of the great terror experienced that day.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is no doubt that the anecdote refers to the tomb of the Acilii Glabriones,
 which is cut under the Monte delle Gioie, and is the only one in the Catacombs
 of Priscilla remarkable for a coating of white stucco.
 Its destruction, therefore, took place under Clement 
\noun on
ix
\noun default
, and was the work of treasure-hunters.
 And the very nature of clandestine excavations, which are the work of malicious
, ignorant, and suspicious persons, explains the reason why no mention of
 the discovery was made to contemporary archaeologists, and the pleasure
 of re-discovering the secret of the Acilii Glabriones was reserved for
 us.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These are by no means the only patricians of high standing whose names have
 come to light from the depths of the catacombs.
 Tacitus (
\emph on
Annal
\emph default
.
 xiii.32) tells how Pomponia Graecina, wife of Plautius, the conqueror of
 Britain, was accused of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

foreign superstition,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 tried by her husband, and acquitted.
 These words long since gave rise to a conjecture that Pomponia Graecina
 was a Christian, and recent discoveries put it beyond doubt.
 An inscription bearing the name of 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Dandelion}ΠΟΜΠΟΝΙΟϹ ΓΡΗΚΕΙΝΟϹ}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 has been found in the Cemetery of Callixtus, together with other records
 of the Pomponii Attici and Bassi.
 Some scholars think that Graecina, the wife of the conqueror of Britain,
 is no other than Lucina, the Christian matron who interred her brethren
 in Christ in her own property, at the second milestone of the Appian Way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Other evidence of the conquests made by the gospel among the patricians
 is given by an inscription discovered in March, 1866, in the Catacombs
 of Praetextatus, near the monument of Quirinus the martyr.
 It is a memorial raised to the memory of his departed wife by Postumius
 Quietus, consul 
\noun on
a.d.

\noun default
 272.
 Here also was found the name of Urania, daughter of Herodes Atticus, by
 his second wife, Vibullia Alcia,
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
A description of the beautiful villa of Herodes, adjoining the Catacombs
 of Praetextatus, will be found in chapter vi.
 pp.
 287 sqq.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 while on the other side of the road, near S.
 Sebastiano, a mausoleum has been found, on the architrave of which the
 name 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
textsc{{
\backslash
color{Maroon}uranior}[{
\backslash
color{Maroon}um}]}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 is engraved.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In chapter vii.
 I shall have the occasion to refer to many Christian relatives of the emperors
 Vespasian and Domitian.
 Eusebius, in speaking of these Flavians, and particularly of Domitilla
 the younger, niece of Domitian, quotes the authority of the historian Bruttius.
 He evidently means Bruttius Praesens, the illustrious friend of Pliny the
 younger, and the grandfather of Crispina, the empress of Commodus.
 If, therefore, the history of Domitilla's martyrdom was written by the
 grandfather of Bruttia Crispina, the empress, it seems probable that the
 two families were united not only by the close proximity of their villas
 and tombs, and by friendship, but especially by community of religion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I may also cite the names of several Cornelii, Caecilii, and Aemilii, the
 flower of Roman nobility, grouped near the graves of S.
 Caecilia and Pope Cornelius; of Liberalis, a 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}consul suffectus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

,
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
A 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}consul suffectus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 was one elected as a substitute in case of the death or retirement of one
 of the regular consuls.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 and a martyr, whose remains were buried in the Via Salaria; of Jallia Clementin
a, a relative of Jallius Bassus, consul 
\noun on
a.d.

\noun default
 230, not to speak of personages of equestrian rank, whose names have been
 collected in hundreds.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A difficulty may arise in the mind of the reader: how was it possible for
 these magistrates, generals, consuls, officers, senators, and governors
 of provinces, to attend to their duties without performing acts of idolatry?
 In chapter xxxvii.
 of the Apology, Tertullian says: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

We are but of yesterday, yet we fill every place that belongs to you, cities,
 islands, outposts; we fill your assemblies, camps, tribes and decuries;
 the imperial palace, the Senate, the forum; we only leave to you your temples.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 But here lies the difficulty; how could they fill these places, and leave
 the temples?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First of all, the Roman emperors gave plenty of liberty to the new religion
 from time to time; and some of them, moved by a sort of religious syncretism,
 even tried to ally it with the official worship of the empire, and to place
 Christ and Jupiter on the steps of the same 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}lararium}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 The first attempt of the kind is attributed to Tiberius; he is alleged
 to have sent a message to the Senate requesting that Christ should be included
 among the gods, on the strength of the official report written by Pontius
 Pilatus of the passion and death of our Lord.
 Malala says that Nero made honest inquiries about the new religion, and
 that, at first, he showed himself rather favorable towards it; a fact not
 altogether improbable, if we take into consideration the circumstances
 of Paul's appeal, his absolution, and his relations with Seneca, and with
 the converts 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}de domo Caesaris}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

of the house of Caesar.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Lampridius, speaking of the religious sentiments of Alexander Severus,
 says: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

He was determined to raise a temple to Christ, and enlisted him among the
 gods; a project attributed also to Hadrian.
 There is no doubt that Hadrian ordered temples to be erected in every city
 to an unknown god; and because they have no statue we still call them temples
 of Hadrian.
 He is said to have prepared them for Christ; but to have been deterred
 from carrying his plan into execution by the consideration that the temples
 of the old god would become deserted, and the whole population turn Christian,
 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}omnes Christianos futuros}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Lampridius, in 
\emph on
Sev.
 Alex.
\emph default
, c.
 43.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The freedom enjoyed by the Church under Caracalla is proved by the 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}graffiti}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 of the Domus Gelotiana, described in my 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Ancient Rome.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
In chapter v., p.
 122, of Ancient Rome, I have attributed these 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}graffiti}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 to the second half of the first century; but after a careful examination
 of the structure of the wall, on the plaster of which they are scratched,
 I am convinced that they must have been written towards the end of the
 second century.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 The one caricaturing the crucifixion, which is reproduced on p.
 122 of that volume, stands by no means alone in certifying to the spreading
 of the faith in the imperial palace.
 The name of Alexamenos, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the faithful,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is repeated thrice.
 There is also a name, 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
textsc{{
\backslash
color{Maroon}libanus}}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, under which another hand has written 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
textsc{
\backslash
color{Maroon}episcopus}}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, and, lower down, 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
textsc{
\backslash
color{Maroon}libanus epi}}
\end_layout

\end_inset

[
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
textsc{
\backslash
color{Maroon}scopus}}
\end_layout

\end_inset

].
 It is very likely a joke on Libanus, a Christian page like Alexamenos,
 whom his fellow-disciples had nicknamed 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the bishop.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 It is true that the title is not necessarily Christian, having been used
 sometimes to denote a municipal officer;
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Orelli, 4024, 
\emph on
Digest L.
\emph default
, iv.
 18, 7.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 but this can hardly be the case in an assembly of youths, like the one
 of the Domus Gelotiana; and the connection between the 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}graffiti}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 of Libanus and those of Alexamenos seems evident.
 In reading these 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}graffiti}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, now very much injured by dampness, exposure, and the unscrupulous hands
 of tourists, we are really witnessing household quarrels between pagan
 and Christian dwellers in the imperial palace, in one of which Caracalla,
 when still young, saw one of his playmates struck and punished on account
 of his Christian origin and persuasion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Septimius Severus and Caracalla issued a constitution,
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See Ulpian: 
\emph on
De officio Procons.
\emph default
, i.
 3.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 which opened to the Jews the way to the highest honors, making the performance
 of such ceremonies as were in opposition to the principles of their faith
 optional with them.
 What was granted to the Jews by the law of the empire may have been permitted
 also to the Christians by the personal benevolence of the emperors.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When Elagabalus collected, or tried to collect, in his own private chapel
 the gods and the holiest relics of the universe, he did not forget Christ
 and his doctrine.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Lampridius, 
\emph on
Heliog.
\emph default
, 3.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 Alexander Severus, the best of Roman rulers, gave full freedom to the Church;
 and once, the Christians having taken possession of a public place on which
 the 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}popinarii}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, or tavern-keepers, claimed rights, Alexander gave judgment in favor of
 the former, saying it was preferable that the place should serve for divine
 worship, rather than for the sale of drinks.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See Greppo: 
\emph on
Mémoire sur les laraires de l'empereur Alexandre Sévère
\emph default
.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There can scarcely be any doubt that the emperor Philip the Arab (Marcus
 Julius Philippus, 
\noun on
a.d.

\noun default
 244), his wife Otacilia Severa, and his son Philip the younger were Christians,
 and friends of S.
 Hippolytus.
 Still, in spite of these periods of peace and freedom of the Church, we
 cannot be blind to the fact that for a Christian nobleman wishing to make
 a career, the position was extremely hazardous.
 Hence we frequently see baptism deferred until mature or old age, and strange
 situations and even acts of decided apostasy created by mixed marriages.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The wavering between public honors and Christian retirement is illustrated
 by some incidents in the life of Licentius, a disciple of S.
 Augustine.
 Licentius was the son of Romanianus, a friend and countryman of Augustine;
 and when the latter retired to the villa of Verecundus, after his conversion,
 in the year 386, Licentius, who had attended his lectures on eloquence
 at Milan, followed him to his retreat.
 He appears as one of the speakers in the academic disputes which took place
 in the villa.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
The name of the villa was 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}Cassiacum}
\end_layout

\end_inset

; its memory has lasted to the present age.
 See the memoir of Luigi Biraghi, 
\emph on
S.
 Agostino a Cassago di Brianza
\emph default
.
 Milano, 1854.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 In 396, Licentius, who had followed his master to Africa, seduced by the
 hopes of a brilliant career, determined to settle in Rome.
 Augustine, deeply grieved at losing his beloved pupil, wrote to call him
 back, and entreated him to turn his face from the failing promises of the
 world.
 The appeal had no effect, and no more had the epistles, in prose and verse,
 addressed to him for the same purpose by Paulinus of Nola.
 Licentius, after finishing the course of philosophy, being scarcely a catechume
n, and a very unsteady one at that, entered a career for public honors.
 Paulinus of Nola describes him as aiming not only at a consulship, but
 also at a pagan pontificate, and reproaches and pities him for his behavior.
 After this, we lose sight of Licentius in history, but a discovery made
 at S.
 Lorenzo fuori le Mura in December, 1862, tells us the end of the tale.
 A marble sarcophagus was found, containing his body, and his epitaph.
 This shows that Licentius died in Rome in 406, after having reached the
 end of his desires, a place in the Senate; and that he died a Christian,
 and was buried near the tomb of S.
 Lorenzo.
 This sarcophagus, hardly noticed by visitors in spite of its great historical
 associations, is preserved in the vestibule of the Capitoline Museum.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As regards mixed marriages, a discovery made in 1877, near the Porta del
 Popolo, has revealed a curious state of things.
 In demolishing one of the towers by which Sixtus IV.
 had flanked that gate, we found a fragment of an inscription of the second
 century, containing these strange and enigmatic words: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

If any one dare to do injury to this structure, or to otherwise disturb
 the peace of her who is buried inside, because she, my daughter, has been
 [or has appeared to be] a pagan among the pagans, and a Christian among
 the Christians
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

\SpecialChar \ldots{}
 Here followed the specification of the penalties which the violator of
 the tomb would incur.
 It was thought at first that the phrase 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}quod inter fedeles fidelis fuit, inter alienos pagana fuit}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 had been dictated by the father as a jocose hint of the religious inconsistency
 of the girl; but such an explanation can hardly be accepted.
 A passage of Tertullian in connection with mixed marriages leads us to
 the true understanding of the epitaph.
 In the second book Ad Uxorem, Tertullian describes the state of habitual
 apostasy to which Christian girls marrying gentiles willingly exposed or
 submitted themselves, especially when the husband was kept in ignorance
 of the religion of the bride.
 He mentions the risks they would incur of betraying their conscience by
 accompanying their husbands to state or civil ceremonies, thus sanctioning
 acts of idolatry by the mere fact of their presence.
 In the book De Corona, he concludes his argument with the words: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

These are the reasons why we do not marry infidels, because such marriages
 lead us back to idolatry and superstition.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The girl buried on the Via Flaminia, by the modern Porta del Popolo, must
 have been born of a Christian mother and a good-natured pagan father; still,
 it seems hardly consistent with the respect which the ancients had for
 tombs that he should be allowed to write such extraordinary words on that
 of his own daughter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We must not believe, however, that gentiles and Christians lived always
 at swords' points.
 Italians in general, and Romans in particular, are noted for their great
 tolerance in matters of religion, which sometimes degenerates into apathy
 and indifference.
 Whether it be a sign of feebleness of character, or of common sense, the
 fact is, that religious feuds have never been allowed to prevail among
 us.
 In no part of the world have the Jews enjoyed more freedom and tolerance
 than in the Roman Ghetto.
 The same feelings prevailed in imperial Rome, except for occasional outbursts
 of passion, fomented by the official persecutors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An inscription was discovered at Ostia, in January, 1867, in a tomb of the
 Via Severiana, of which I append an accurate copy.
 The tomb and the inscription are purely pagan, as shown by the invocation
 to the infernal gods, 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}Diis Manibus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 This being the case, how can we account for the names of Paul and Peter,
 which, taken separately, give great probability, and taken together give
 almost absolute certainty, of having been adopted in remembrance of the
 two apostles? One circumstance may help us to explain the case: the preference
 shown for the name of Paul over that of Peter; the former was borne by
 both father and son, the latter appears only as a surname given to the
 son.
 This fact is not without importance, if we recollect that the two men who
 show such partiality for the name of Paul belong to the family of Anneus
 Seneca, the philosopher, whose friendship with the apostle has been made
 famous by a tradition dating at least from the beginning of the fourth
 century.
 The tradition rests on a foundation of truth.
 The apostle was tried and judged in Corinth by the proconsul Marcus Anneus
 Gallio, brother of Seneca; in Rome he was handed over to Afranius Burro,
 prefect of the praetorium, and an intimate friend of Seneca.
 We know, also, that the presence of the prisoner, and his wonderful eloquence
 in preaching the new faith, created a profound sensation among the members
 of the praetorium and of the imperial household.
 His case must have been inquired into by the philosopher himself, who happened
 to be 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}consul suffectus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 at the time.
 The modest tombstone, discovered by accident among the ruins of Ostia,
 gives us the evidence of the bond of sympathy and esteem established, in
 consequence of these events, between the Annei and the founders of the
 Church in Rome.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Its resemblance to the name of the Annei reminds me of another remarkable
 discovery connected with the same city, and with the same question.
 There lived at Ostia, towards the middle of the second century, a manufacturer
 of pottery and terracottas, named Annius Ser\SpecialChar \ldots{}
, whose lamps were exported
 to many provinces of the empire.
 These lamps are generally ornamented with the image of the Good Shepherd;
 but they show also types which are decidedly pagan, such as the labors
 of Hercules, Diana the huntress, etc.
 It has been surmised that Annius Ser\SpecialChar \ldots{}
 was converted to the gospel, and that
 the adoption of the symbolic figure of the Redeemer on his lamps was a
 result of his change of religion; but to explain the case it is not necessary
 to accept this theory.
 I believe he was a pagan, and that the lamps with the Good Shepherd were
 produced by him to order, and from a design supplied to him by a member
 of the local congregation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another question concerning the behavior of early Christians has reference
 to their military service under the imperial eagles, and to the cases of
 conscience which may have arisen from it.
 On this I may refer the reader to the works of Mamachi, Lami, Baumgarten,
 Le Blant, and de Rossi,
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See 
\emph on
Bullettino di archeologia cristiana
\emph default
, 1865, p.
 50.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 who have discussed the subject thoroughly.
 Speaking from the point of view of material evidence, I have to record
 several discoveries which prove that officers and men of the 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}cohortes praetoriae}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}urbanae}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 could serve with equal loyalty their God and their sovereign.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In November, 1885, I was present at the discovery of a marble sarcophagus
 in the military burial-grounds of the Via Salaria, opposite the gate of
 the Villa Albani.
 It bore two inscriptions, one on the lid, the other on the body.
 The first defies interpretation;
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
It contains the words 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
textsc{
\backslash
color{Maroon}petro lillvti pavlo}}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 They are surely genuine and ancient.
 I examined them in company with Mommsen, Jordan, and de Rossi, and they
 attributed them to the beginning of the third century of our era.
 The best suggestion regarding their origin is that they belong to a person,
 probably Christian, who used the name Petrus as 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}gentilitium}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, and Paulus as 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}cognomen}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, and who was the son of Lillutus, however barbaric this last name may sound.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 the second mentions the name of a little girl, Publia Aelia Proba, who
 was the daughter of a captain of the ninth battalion of the praetorians,
 and a lady named Clodia Plautia.
 They were all Christians; but for a reason unknown to us, they avoided
 making a show of their persuasion, and were buried among the gentiles.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another stray Christian military tomb, erected by a captain of the sixth
 battalion, named Claudius Ingenuus, was found, in 1868, in the Vigna Grandi,
 near S.
 Sebastiano.
 Here also we find the intention of avoiding an open profession of faith.
 A regular cemetery of Christian praetorians was found in the spring of
 the same year by Marchese Francesco Patrizi, in his villa adjoining the
 praetorian camp.
 It is neither large nor interesting, and it seems to prove that the gospel
 must have made but few proselytes in the imperial barracks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We must not believe that the transformation of Rome from a pagan into a
 Christian city was a sudden and unexpected event, which took the world
 by surprise.
 It was the natural result of the work of three centuries, brought to maturity
 under Constantine by an inevitable reaction against the violence of Diocletian'
s rule.
 It was not a revolution or a conversion in the true sense of these words;
 it was the official recognition of a state of things which had long ceased
 to be a secret.
 The moral superiority of new doctrines over the old religions was so evident,
 so overpowering, that the result of the struggle had been a foregone conclusion
 since the age of the first apologists.
 The revolution was an exceedingly mild one, the transformation almost impercept
ible.
 No violence was resorted to, and the tolerance and mutual benevolence so
 characteristic of the Italian race was adopted as the fundamental policy
 of State and Church.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The transformation may be followed stage by stage in both its moral and
 material aspect.
 There is not a ruin of ancient Rome that does not bear evidence of the
 great change.
 Many institutions and customs still flourishing in our days are of classical
 origin, and were adopted, or tolerated, because they were not in opposition
 to Christian principles.
 Beginning with the material side of the question, the first monument to
 which I have to refer is the Arch of Constantine, raised in 315 at the
 foot of the Palatine, where the Via Triumphalis diverges from the Sacra
 Via.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The importance of this arch, from the point of view of the question treated
 in this chapter, rests not on its sculptured panels and medallions, — spoils
 taken at random from older structures, from which the arch has received
 the nickname of Aesop's crow (
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}la cornacchia di Esopo}
\end_layout

\end_inset

), — but on the inscription engraved on each side of the attic.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The S.
 P.
 Q.
 R.
 have dedicated this triumphal arch to Constantine, because 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}instinctu divinitatis}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 (by the will of God), and by his own virtue, etc., he has liberated the
 country from the tyrant [Maxentius] and his faction.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\begin_inset Marginal
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
To the Emperor Caesar Flavius Constantine, the Greatest, Pius, Felix, Augustus:
 inspired by (a) divinity, in the greatness of his mind, he used his army
 to save the state by the just force of arms from a tyrant on the one hand
 and every kind of factionalism on the other; therefore the Senate and the
 People of Rome have dedicated this exceptional arch to his triumphs.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 The opinion long prevailed among archaeologists that the words 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}instinctu divinitatis}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 were not original, but added after Constantine's conversion.
 Cardinal Mai thought that the original formula was 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}diis faventibus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

by the help of the gods,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 while Henzen suggested 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}nutu Iovis optimi maximi}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

by the will of Jupiter.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Cavedoni was the first to declare that the inscription had never been altered,
 and that the two memorable words — the first proclaiming officially the
 name of the true God in the face of imperial Rome — belonged to the original
 text, sanctioned by the Senate.
 The controversy was settled in 1863, when Napoleon III.
 obtained from the Pope the permission to make a plaster cast of the arch.
 With the help of the scaffolding, the scholars of the time examined the
 inscription, the shape of each letter, the holes of the bolts by which
 the gilt-bronze letters were fastened, the joints of the marble blocks,
 the color and quality of the marble, and decided unanimously that the inscripti
on had never been tampered with, and that none of its letters had been changed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The arch was raised in 315.
 Was Constantine openly professing his faith at that time? Opinions are
 divided.
 Some think he must have waited until the defeat of Licinius in 323; others
 suggest the year 311 as a more probable date of his profession.
 The supporters of the first theory quote in its favor the fact that pagan
 symbols and images of gods appear on coins struck by Constantine and his
 sons; but this fact is easily explained, when we consider that the coinage
 of bronze was a privilege of the Senate, and that the Senate was pagan
 by a large majority.
 Many of Constantine's constitutions and official letters speak in favor
 of an early declaration of faith.
 When the Donatists appealed to him from the verdict of the councils of
 Arles and Rome, he wrote to the bishops: 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}Meum judicium postulant, qui ipse judicium Christi expecto}
\end_layout

\end_inset

: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

They appeal to me, when I myself must be judged by Christ.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The verdict of the council of Rome against the sectarians was rendered
 on October 2, 313, in the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

palace of Fausta in the Lateran;
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the imperial palace of the Lateran, therefore, had already been handed
 over to the bishop of Rome, and a portion of it turned into a place of
 worship.
 The basilica of the Lateran still retains its title of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Mother and head of all churches of Rome, and of the world,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 ranking above those of S.
 Peter and S.
 Paul in respect to age.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Such being the state of affairs when the triumphal arch was erected, nothing
 prevents us from believing those two words to be original, and to express
 the relations then existing between the first Christian emperor and the
 old pagan Senate.
 At all events, nothing is more uncompromising than these two words, because
 the titles of 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}Deus summus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}Deus altissimus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}magnus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}aeternus}
\end_layout

\end_inset

, are constantly found on monuments pertaining to the worship of Atys and
 Mithras.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

These words,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 concludes de Rossi, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

far from being a profession of Christianity engraved on the arch at a later
 period, are simply a `moyen terme,' a compromise, between the feelings
 of the Senate and those of the emperor.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See de Rossi: 
\emph on
Bullettino di archeologia cristiana
\emph default
, 1863, p.
 49.
 — Rohault de Fleury: 
\emph on
L'arc de triomphe de Constantin, in the Revue archéologique
\emph default
, Sept.
 1863, p.
 250.
 — W.
 Henzen: 
\emph on
Bullettino dell'Instituto
\emph default
, 1863, p.
 183.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Many facts related by contemporary documents prove that change of religion
 was, at the beginning, a personal affair with the emperor, and not a question
 of state; the emperor was a Christian, but the old rules of the empire
 were not interfered with.
 In dealing with his pagan subjects Constantine showed so much tact and
 impartiality as to cast doubts upon the sincerity of his conversion.
 He has been accused of having accepted from the people of Hispellum (Spello,
 in Umbria), the honor of a temple, and from the inhabitants of Roman Africa
 that of a priesthood for the worship of his own family (
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

{
\backslash
color{Maroon}sacerdotium Flaviae gentis}
\end_layout

\end_inset

).
 The exculpation is given by Constantine himself in his address of thanks
 to the Hispellates: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

We are pleased and grateful for your determination to raise a temple in
 honor of our family and of ourselves; and we accept it, provided you do
 not contaminate it with superstitious practices.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The honor of a temple and of a priesthood, therefore, was offered and accepted
 as a political demonstration, as an act of loyalty, and as an occasion
 for public festivities, both inaugural and anniversary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In accepting rites and customs which were not offensive to her principles
 and morality, the Church showed equal tact and foresight, and contributed
 to the peaceful accomplishment of the transformation.
 These rites and customs, borrowed from classical times, are nowhere so
 conspicuous as in Rome.
 Giovanni Marangoni, a scholar of the last century, wrote a book on this
 subject which is full of valuable information.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
See Bibliography, p.
 1.
 The title of the book may be translated thus: 
\emph on
On the pagan and profane objects transferred to churches for their use and
 adornment
\emph default
.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 The subject is so comprehensive, and in a certain sense so well known,
 that I must satisfy myself by mentioning only a few particulars connected
 with recent discoveries.
 First, as to symbolic images allowed in churches and cemeteries.
 Of Orpheus playing on the lyre, while watching his flock, as a substitute
 for the Good Shepherd, there have been found in the catacombs four paintings,
 two reliefs on sarcophagi, one engraving on a gem.
 Here is the latest representation discovered, from the Catacombs of Priscilla
 (1888).
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
